
===================
The User Experience
===================

Before we dive into the internals of the site, let me explain what the
end result is supposed to be: what the user is meant to
experience. There are actually three types of user (at least): the
individual knitter, the yarn-store owner, and the
sweater-designer. We are currently developing for the individual-user
market, but plan to expand to the other two users in the future.



.. _individual_knitter_experience:

-------------------------
Individual knitters
-------------------------

When an indivdiual user creates an account, they will be invited to
enter their body measurements. This process may take a few minuutes,
and may make them feel uncomfortable. However, they need only enter
these measurements once, and need never see them again. Also, we will
provide supporting material: a print-out sheet of instructions,
print-out chart on which to record the measurements, YouTube videos on
how to take the measurements, etc. (It is important that we provide
instructions on how to take the measurements: some of them will be
hard to measure accurately on your own, and we'd like to minimize the
amount of error.)

Knitters can enter more than one set of body-measurements. After all,
they might like to knit for their mothers, daughters, friends,
etc. Again, they will need to enter these measurements only
once. After that, they will be stored on our site and available to
them at any time. Their own measurements are not special-- aside from
being the first measurments they enter, they are not distinguished
from the other measurement-sets in any way. Also, bodies can be edited
at any time.

After that, users need to enter a swatch. Sure, they *can* just make
these up or use the gauge provided by the yarn maker, but we really
want to encourage them to actually knit a swatch and measure it. They
will get much better results that way. As with bodies, a swatch need
be entered only once and is then available to the user at any
time. (While bodies can be edited by the user, swatches cannot.) 

Lastly, the user purchases some number of credits, where each credit
is good for one pattern-generation. The price-per-credit will go down
when you buy multiple credits at a time.

.. note::
  We have not really thought about whether users can give credits to
  each other as gifts, sell their credits on a secondary market, etc.

Now the real fun begins. To generate a pattern, the user goes through
the following process:

* First, they choose a design: pullover vs. cardigan, sleeved
  vs. vest, neckline, etc. The site will be pre-populated with a number of popular
  combinations ('vee-neck sleeved pullover', etc.) and the user can
  simply choose the 'classic design' that they want. Or they can
  customize thier design, and choose all of the various options
  themselves. In either case, they also need to choose:

  * The body to fit,

  * The swatch for the yarn/needles they plan to use, and

  * The intended 'fit': snug, average, or relaxed.

* Based on these inputs, the site generates a schematic and presents
  it to the user. Becuase of various issues (repeats, the limit of
  shaping, etc.) this schematic may differ from what the user had in
  mind. Therefore, the user can take this step to revise/edit the
  schematic and re-submit. The site will return and display a new
  schematic which again (for the same reasons) may differ from the
  edits the user made. They can again edit the schematic and
  re-submit. This will continue until the site presents a schematic
  the user likes, at which point the user submits it for pattern generation.

* At this point, the site generates the pattern (and charges the user
  a credit). The pattern appears on the screen, and the user can also
  download a PDF version.

Just like bodies and swatches are persistent, patterns are too. Every
pattern generated by a user (and paid for by a credit) will be
available to that user at any time. They can see all of their patterns
every time they log in. Patterns cannot be edited. Patterns will link
back to the body and swatch used for generation, and will display the
design-choices made by the user.

.. note::
  We have not thought about whether one user can send a pattern to
  another user through our site, but maybe we want to use email/social
  networks for that instead?







------------------
Designers
------------------

We can see two ways in which sweater designers might want to use our
site: to sell their designs, or as a design-generation tool.

^^^^^^^^^^^
Design stores
^^^^^^^^^^^

In :ref:`individual_knitter_experience`, we mentioned that the site
would come pre-populated with a number of 'classic' designs for the
user's convenience. We imagine that sweater designers would like to be
able to sell their designs to users using the same mechanism. When
generating a pattern, the user would be able to use a pre-populated
design from a designer's 'store'. The designer then gets a fee every
time their design is used in a pattern-generation.

This idea seems pursuing, but might be quite difficult to achieve. We
would need to implement 'stores' in the site, for example, which
actually seems straightforward. Less straightforward, however, would
be the designer's interface:

* How much would the designers like to customize the look and feel of
  their store? How would we let them?

* How would users be able to enter their designs? How would we create
  an interface general enough to handle all of the various things
  designers like to use in their designs (repeats, panels, asymmetry,
  etc.)?

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Design generation 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


Alternatly, designers might like to use our site as a specialized
computation engine for use when writing patterns destined for
magazines, yarn companies, etc. In this case, they would want a
workflow very different from that of the individual user;

* Instead of targetting a specific body, they would want to design for
  a set of *grades*, where a grade is essentially the measurement from
  a schematic. That is, it describes the measurements (widths,
  lengths) of a finished garment-- but not the neckline, construction,
  etc. That is, a magazine or yarn company will already know what
  sizes it wants (and usually wants a range of sizes, from small to
  large, so as to 'cover' most knitters).

* The professional designer would probably not be interested in the
  actual text we use to present a pattern to the user. They likely
  have their own abbreviations, style, templates, etc. Therefore, they
  may be more interested in receiving a spreadsheet or CSV file of
  numbers than a generated pattern.

This workflow seems straightforward, and is actually simpler than that
of the individual knitter. (We do not need to add eases to bodies, for
example, as the professional designer would already know what
measurements they want for the peices.) But there are big problems
lurking just below the surface. The designer will likely provide their
own instruction-text for the pattern, but that text **must apply to
all grades**. Therefore, we must generate all the numbers in a uniform
way-- we have to *remove* a lot of the tricks we've baked in to the
pattern-generation process to get a garment to fit as perfectly as
possible. This process is going to require a deep collaboration
between developers and designers, and will ultimately serve a small
portion of the market. So while it may be valuable in terms of
industry goodwill, it will probably not be that lucrative and so is
being delayed until (much) later.

